At XYZ we value and provide our employees with a reasonable and regular amount of time off from work. An employee leave of absence policy describes the rules and procedures for employees willing to take time off. We understand that balancing professional and personal life is necessary. However, depending on the situation, the company can only approve or refuse the leave application.PurposeThis policy describes the guidelines for employees requesting leave of absence and specifies the types and number of leaves each employee is entitled to in a calendar year.EligibilityA leave policy covers all regular and confirmed employees, but trainees or employees on probation can only take sick leave. The leave year runs from 1 January to 31 December.ScopeThis leave policy applies to all employees in the organization.Leave EntitlementAll the employees are entitled to Leave, and the types of leave are as follows.
Privilege Leave
Casual Leave
Sick Leave
Maternity Leave
Paternity Leave
Sabbatical Leave
Festivals and Holidays
Unpaid Leave
Guidelines
The leave calculation will be done on a calendar year basis.
Casual or sick leaves will be credited to the employee’s Leave account at the start of the calendar year, which is 1 January or the date of joining for new employees.
Privilege leave will be credited to the employee’s Leave account at the beginning of every month accordingly.
Employees joining after the date will receive their leave entitlements, proportionally calculated based on the time remaining that year.
Privilege leave is entitled only after the employee completes probation or whenever their employment is confirmed.
Casual or sick leave cannot be availed for more than “number of days.”
Casual or sick leave cannot be availed for less than “number of days.”
If you request leave for more than the “number of days,” you must submit a doctor’s certificate.
The company has the right to refer any employee to a doctor to determine the seriousness of the sickness.
The leaves should be applied in advance for “number of days”.
FestivalsApart from the above-mentioned leaves, there will be a number of days paid holidays. The list for the same will be released at the beginning of the calendar year. Note that these holidays cannot be carried forward or encashed.Leave without PayEmployees can apply for leave without pay when their leave balance is zero or negative. This is necessary to maintain the hierarchy and chain of command. The reporting manager will send his suggestion to the Head of HR for final approval. Holidays falling under week-offs will not be paid. LWP for more than “number of days” requires permission from the Director or CEO.Sabbatical LeaveEmployees who wish to enhance their qualifications relevant to their jobs can take a sabbatical leave for up to one year, provided they have a minimum of “number of years” of continuous service within the organization. The HOD should send recommendations to the head of HR for the CEO’s final approval.Maternity LeaveMaternity leave benefits will be granted to women not covered under the ESI Act as per the Maternity Benefit Act 1961. In case of sickness or illness related to pregnancy, leave can be extended up to a maximum “Time frame,” which will be adjusted against the employee’s leave balance.Paternity LeaveThe benefits of paternity leave will be granted to all male employees for a maximum of a “Time frame” on account of childbirth or adoption of a child. This is applicable for up to “Number of children” children. Paternity Leave needs to be availed within the “Time frame” of the birth of the child.Leave during Probation or Notice PeriodEmployees serving probation and notice periods will/will not usually be allowed to take leave.Leave Accumulation/Encashment PolicyAny employee is allowed an accumulation of a maximum of “Number of days” days of leave. The accrued leaves will automatically get encashed at the beginning of the following calendar year. Any time the accumulated leaves exceed the “Number of days”, they can encash the excess leaves. For this, the previous year’s only leaves will be considered.Application ProcessAll employees must submit their leave request application to their reporting manager within 30 days. There is an exception for emergencies. The request should include the type of leave, start and end dates, and the reason.Approval ProcessThe reporting manager will review the request and decide whether to approve or deny the leave. If the leave is approved, the manager will inform the employee.Disciplinary MeasuresThe reporting manager and HR head will take strict action if the policy is not followed. These can range from verbal or written warnings for minor violations to suspension or demotion for serious violations.ExceptionManagement may modify the above policy based on statutory requirements or business needs. However, exceptions will only be permitted if the Head of HR approves them.